# Findings

## Producing open-endedness 

At the outset, groups were always emphatic that they could not specify in advance what the end-product will look like, and that they often did not or could not even unambiguously say what the show was to be about. The uncertainty that is inherent in nature of creative process, at least in the beginning, can be acutely distressing. As one informant describes: “At every point in the process there are lots and lots of possibilities and it’s unclear what the show is going to look like at the end. In more traditional theater type work you may need to commit to, say, a set two years before the showing so a lot of it is already fixed. But in circus R&D… [mimic an attempt at holding on to something shapeless]. It’s really difficult to navigate that process. (F-2; 27)”. 

The challenge for groups is thus to not only create while experiencing the uncertainty but indeed often *through* grappling with this uncertainty.  As Catmull describes in his book on creativity in Pixar, "there is a sweet spot between the known and the unknown where originality happens; the key is to be able to linger there without panicking". Groups I observed encounters this very challenge as they try to move forward with individual ideas while simultaneously leaving the end-points or overarching concepts open-ended. 

### Retaining ambiguity 

The anxieties and distress that groups experienced retains ambiguity in their creative processes by highlighting that uncertainties over quality are still unresolved. The uncertainties they experienced throughout the process of developing ideas was such that they rarely felt sure of the quality of their ideas or the direction they were heading in. For example, the following exchange from a group creating a show around themes of immigration post-Brexit illustrates their emotional distress and how it retains ambiguity in their process. 

> K-1; 20: I don’t know if what we’re doing is too… vain? I just don’t know. I don’t want the audience to be switched off… How? [groans and puts his head in his hands]
> K-2; 20: I’m not sure… I guess dramaturgically it works because it comes from a place of honesty?
> K-1; 20: Another big thing is, why should anyone care? Why should we be the ones saying all these? Should we be the ones saying all these? [sits down and lean forward with his forearm resting on his lap and his head hanging, looking down at his feet]

Here K-1 communicates his anxiety over the worth of their project by asking questions such as "why should anyone care" to K-2. In this context, these questions were not intended to elicit information or start actual discussions, but rather as rhetorical questions that highlights K-1's uncertainty about the value and quality of their project. This is also demonstrated through behavioral cues such as putting his head in his hands that signal to group members his frustration. While unpleasant for groups to go through, these interactions makes it salient for the group that the uncertainties are unsolved and they have to continue grappling with it.

In addition, having these negative affective experiences retains ambiguity as groups consider most progress as only tentative. Even if they have developed and refined a particular idea, the progress they have made are often heavily modified or nullified at a later stage where the ideas can be dropped. An informant once described the dropping of ideas as "killing your darlings", suggesting that it was an emotionally difficult but necessary process of letting of something she had grown rather attached to. That progress is tentative is exemplifed in a comment an informant made after what they considered was a productive day of developing ideas: ""Today we keep saying 'we have something, we have something', but tomorrow we may have nothing again." Groups thus recognized that uncertainty was a key part of their creative journey - so much so they could not even know how ideas might change from one day to the next. 

### Creating hope 
Groups often expressed optimism and excitement about the opportunities and possibilities that arose from uncertainties, despite the anxieties and frustrations it was simultaneously causing them. Describing their creative process: “An experimental circus show can be about anything. That’s what makes it so exciting.” Later the same informants said of developing ideas for the show: “When you find something, you have a feeling, you’re so excited – you’ve discovered something!” (C-1; 27). They often smiled and talked animatedly when they talked about this aspect of creating, with more inflexions in tone to convey their anticipations. As in the statements above, they tended to focus on the breadth of opportunities rather than pitfalls and problems. Through these type of statements, informants described to me and to one another how the very nature of uncertainty - the fact that their performances were not scripted or choreographed but created from nothing - produced new possibilities. 

Another way through which optimism created hope which factored into how groups grappled with uncertainty was by creating a sense that end goals, while currently unknown, were achievable. When it comes to navigating individual ideas, groups often expressed optimism that elaborating and experimenting with an idea would open them up to new possibilities and directions even if their original intention did not work out. For example, a group working on themes of isolation in the medium of physical comedy had spent two days cutting up felt pieces to hang from the ceiling to test out an idea they had for a visual effect. This was a very costly experiment for them considering they that only had around ten days of access to the venue they were working in. When asked how likely they thought the idea was going to pan out, an informant responded that, “We’re somewhat sure but also open to it bringing us somewhere else. It might inspire something else, or it might work better as something other than the original idea and that would be good too. (T-1; 4)” Here it is again clear that progress was tentative as they were only "somewhat" sure, but they were not paralyzed by the uncertainty because they were optimistic that as they navigated the idea it would branch out into something worthwhile in the end. 

## Converging 

I observed groups to build consensus using shared affect such as excitement and enthusiasm rather than through explicit criteria or evaluation. Affect thus provided a pathway to converging around ideas that are worthy of further pursuit. For instance, the episode below illustrates the interactions of a group converging around an idea, at the end of a long discussion during which many ideas were generated and dropped. During this interaction, group members shared their subjective, affective responses with one another, sustained engagement with one focal idea, and converged around it without explicitly evaluating it. 

> Lin explains the cat’s cradle, “It’s this children’s game where you have two pieces of string between your hands and you loop them back and forth in a pattern and make all sorts of shapes with them, such a rabbit or a broom.” Ros and Ann listened, rapt. Their bodies were leaning slightly forward toward Lin and their eyes were fixed on her. When she was done explaining, Ros picked up the thread of the conversation immediately: “Imagine making those shapes with our bodies, it’ll be so cool.” Ann, without missing a beat, agrees: “Yes we can do it with silk or rope and we can play with different shapes.” Lin throws out a suggestion: “We can try the simple broom shape first. You’ll see just bodies moving around in the space and nothing is happening and then suddenly – boom! You see a fully formed shape!” Ros nods and adds, “Yeah and you’ll still be able to see the ropes between them that’s connecting them.” The group continue in this way for around another five minutes, with Ann making one last suggestion about how cool it’ll be to play with the heights of the people making the shapes. At this point it was clear to everyone that this was what they will spend the afternoon on when they get back into the studio.

### Sharing affective responses 
These moments of convergences typically began with group members sharing with one another their subjective, affective responses toward the idea. Here, the shift in Ros and Ann's body language indicates interest as they orient themselves toward Lin who was sharing her idea of incorporating the "cat's cradle" into their performance. Ros seems to have become more energetic and wound up as Lin talked, as can be observed from her springing into conversation the moment Lin finished sharing. These behavioral cues of interest and excitement are accompanied with phrases such as "it'll be so cool" which communicated an explicitly subjective response that is also affectively positive. Earlier in the same conversation where the group had not converged around an idea they tended to use more cognitive statements starting with "I think..." or "I believe..." In other episodes, group members also frequently asked one another questions such as "how do you feel" that were meant to elicit these affective responses, as opposed to "what do you think" which may elicit more cognitively-oriented statements. 

### Sustaining engagement 
Shared interest and excitement around the focal idea maintains engagement with the focal ideas. In the example, group members constantly make affirmative statements, starting their sentences with "yes..." and "yeah and...", this pattern acknowledges the focal idea instead of negating it and ensures that the discussion remains around the focal idea. They were also quick to make comments and give their ideas, speaking immediately after one another. At the same time they also build on the focal idea by making comments and suggestions meant to clarify or extend it. Ann suggests different materials such as silk and rope that can be used for the cat's cradle; Lin suggests a particular shape - "the broom" - which they can start with. 

In the absence of shared enthusiasm for the focal idea, group members tended to make suggestions that are unrelated to the the focal idea that in turn reduces engagement. Earlier in the same conversation, for example, Lin came up with the idea of painting silks to look like trees and Ros responded to this by acknowledging Lin's idea but then going on to suggest using synchronized movements on stage. Ros' suggestion was not building on Lin's idea and served essentially as an alternative which directed the group's attention away. As such, when an idea does not garner shared enthusiasm it is usually dropped from the process. Lin's trees were not mentioned again for the time I observed the group. 

### Not verbalizing rationale 
Groups often converged around ideas while not explicitly verbalizing their individual rationales for why they considered it worthy of further pursuit. In this example, group members used the word "cool" which is understood by the rest to be loaded with meaningful connotations of value and quality, without ever explicitly defining what "cool" meant to each one of them. Elsewhere they also often used similar words such as "interesting" to convey a valuation without getting to the rationale or how they think the idea connected to the larger concept. Indeed, when asked what they considered interesting or what they meant by interesting, informants were unaminously unable to verbalize but agreed that they would recognize it when they see it. These affective responses were thus also seen by groups as a legitimate way to discuss ideas. Groups considered them as stemming from "instincts" or "tastes" that could not be explicitly defined. This allows groups to side-step a more cognitively oriented discussion about the value of ideas which may end up as long discussions without any clear leads. Here, building on the shared enthusiasm the group is able converge on an idea within a few minutes. 


## Generating momentum 
The process of adapting and refining ideas is rife with uncertainties and difficulties and groups have to be sufficiently energized to engage in it. This interaction episode illustration how momentum is generated as groups viewed and experienced exploration as a fun, high-energy activity and how their affective experiences transformed the pacing of interactions. 

> They had just spent two hours trying to figure out if there's any value to skating in a stand-hand position or on all fours. It was a rather slow session, nothing really jumped out at them and they were languid, moving slowly to get tea and took a little break. While we were resting on the crashmats, Angel went and started balancing by herself on the beam of the tight-wire that they had taken apart, she didn’t say much any about what she was doing but it was clear that she was trying something out because she tried it again and again and adjusted her body while paying attention to how the scene looks from the mirror. Hanna observed her for awhile from the sides on the crash mats. And then she walked over and stepped onto the beam and started balancing too. 

> For a few moments they said nothing. But as they watched themselves balancing they started to giggle. They looked at themselves and each other in the mirror and starting laughing. They jokingly tried to push each other off the beam - pushing just hard enough such that the one person squeals and wobbles but doesn't fall off. When they eventually both fell off, Angel immediately asked, "Shall we try that again? It was fun to do." Hanna agreed and suggested that maybe they can place a thick piece of crashmat in front of their legs so that from the audience's point of view it's unclear what they are balancing on. Angel said that sounded interesting and they quickly moved the crash mats and rushed back onto the beam. They balanced and laughed like children. 

> This time when they stopped Hanna asked, "What can we add that'll be surprising?" Angel suggested, out of the blue, that they can have a tea party on the balancing beam. Without questioning her Hanna agreed and they dashed to the kitchen to get some cups and saucer.

### Energizing 
The process of exploring and navigating ideas is seen as a fun, high-energy activity that is inherently rewarding or enjoyable. Here, the group pursued the idea in part because it was "fun to do". For instance, when asked what their plans for exploration were for the day, an informant responded: “I don’t know what we’re going to do today… We’re going to play! It’s always fun [laughs]. (H-3;11)” The positive affect derived from the exploration itself is seen as desirable and rewarding - this motivates groups to engage in the process regardless of the outcome. The effortful process of navigating an idea is portrayed here as light-hearted and non-consequential. The group behaved in a playful way toward these other - teasing and jokingly pushing each other, the way that children might on a playground. Elsewhere they also often used these language of "play" to a similar effect. 

Describing demanding tasks as playful and high-energy rather than cognitively effortful also oriented groups toward action and spontaneity. Here, Angel gave a very spontaneous, unfiltered suggestion of having a "tea party" on a balancing beam - the two seem entirely unrelated but the group did not dwell on the irrelevance but instead acted quickly on their ideas. Groups also tended to frame idea exploration something quite frivolous and easy to get started with and continue doing, frequently saying saying “have a little play with [the equipment/the idea]” or referring to physically demanding activities such as aerial straps or partner acrobatics as “jumpy jumps” and “bouncing time”. In a conversation where the group talked about possibilities for aerial acrobatics, one group member said, "Let’s try it… Let’s jam!"

### Transforming pace 

Affect also energizes groups by transforming the pace of their interactions. When the group experience positive affect such as a sense of progress, they become much more responsive to each others' comments and suggestions and are prone to acting upon ideas immediately. In this episode, the pace was slow and the atmosphere subdued in the beginning, with the group seemingly discouraged from an earlier unproductive session. As they begin to balance together, however, the mood and atmosphere in the room quickly transforms. They started making more eye contact as well as physical contact with each other, gesturing at each other in the mirror. There was also more smiling which eventually became giggling and laughing. The pacing of interaction became much more staccato at this point as they responded to each others' comments quickly and also acted quickly on suggestions. Whereas before, an idea might have been talked over or questioned, here when Hanna suggested covering their legs for a visual effect, they proceeded immediately to use materials they have in the room to try out the idea. This gave them the metaphorical "spring in their steps" as they were no longer dragging their feet but moving quickly from action to action. From an observer's perspective, there was a palpable change in the energy in the mood from heavy to light, the pace from slow to quick. 

## Creating space for re-orienting 

### Creating pause 
Where negative affect arises it is usually followed by the process of navigating and exploring grinding to a halt. For instance, in an episode where the group explored the idea of rubbing ink on the body to communicate not recognizing one's own body in dementia, A physically experimented with the idea on aerial straps. When she came back down she shared her subjective, emotive response of "[liking] the texture". Where they share in these visceral responses, groups are typically very quick to affirm and communicate their own responses, making statements such as "yeah, I like it too and I also like [this other aspect]. In fact, the most common response to any ideas or suggestions is always "yeah, and", reminiscent of the technique of "yes and-ing" used in improvisation, intended to allow group members to build up on each others' ideas. Here, however, there was a long, uncharacteristic silence. H was hesitant to make affirmative statements. The first word that H says after the silence is "but" - a sharp departure from the usual statements of acknowledgment and agreement. This highlights that she did not feel the same way about the idea as A, and has a different subjective response to it. This silence changed the rhythm of the navigation by interrupting the flow of interactions. No comments to build up or clarify the idea was shared. A tense, awkward silence ensued during which nothing was said or done. 

These episodes were also characterized by a lack of immediate resolution and thus prolonged inactivity. Continuing the example above, H was reconciliatory and conceded that it was perhaps worthwhile to explore the idea further if A feels that it were worthwhile. But when A takes her up on her offer she subtly demurs, saying "I don't know". H continues to make non-committal statements - not explicitly saying but repeatedly saying "I don't know" and "I'm not so sure". At this point there were long pauses between comments, with little to no eye contact and smiling. They were clearly aware and acknowledged that they have diverged, but this divergence is not typically resolved. Often they made statements such as, "we don't have to make a decision today" and moved on to a different idea for the time being, took a break, or stopped for the day. In the case of H+A, they stopped talking about the idea and decided to switch to taking some promotion footage for social media.  

### Causing friction 

The divergence and negative affect often caused friction between group members as they tussled for creative control. Returning to the interactions between H and A, while there was little mention of decision-making or evaluation before, H now brings up evaluation multiple times and highlights its imminence: "I think we need to be more choosy [for ideas connected to concept]", "I'm not convinced that everything can be used". Compared to an earlier episode where the group explored an idea of moving a performer's legs in the air such that she looks like she's walking in space, H said: "I don't know how it's related to concept but I like it." Bringing evaluation and decision-making back prominently into the picture and re-introduced the anxiety associated with evaluative pressures. At this point A shows her feelings of being cornered and alieniated by turning to researcher to get an outside opinion - this is very unusual as the observer is almost never brought into the creative process. In addition to highlighting evaluation, group members also start finding fault with each others' ideas - H insisted that the ink was messy and that she "could not see the connection" while A insisted that H was basing her impression on incomplete materials. They spent 15-20 minutes talking back and forth, puncutuated with long pauses, without getting anyway. They were clearly frustrated with each other as they sighed and groaned and avoided eye contact. 