## Introduction 

- what is the phenomenon 
- what are the gaps 
- what am i doing about them [earlier statement of RQ]

> “When we are making a movie, the movie doesn’t exist yet. We are not uncovering it or discovering it; it’s not as if it resides somewhere and is just waiting to be found. There is no movie… In a fundamental way, the movie is hidden from us. I know this can feel overwhelming. There is a reason that writers talk about the terror of the blank page… It’s extremely difficult to create something out of nothing...navigating between the known and the unknown.” – Ed Catmull, co-founder of Pixar (Catmull & Wallace, 2014)

Creative endeavors, from building start-ups to creating artworks, involve a process of evolving and developing an initial idea or insight. While research has traditionally focused on the role of idea generation (Paulus, 2000; Nijstad & De Dreu, 2002; Mumford, 2003), the work of elaborating, developing, and adapting ideas have long been recognized as being essential to generating creative outputs (Guilford, 1967; Nijstad & De Dreu, 2002). For groups to generate creative output, they need to bridge the non-trivial gap between an initial idea and a fully, unambiguously specified one which is ready for implementation (Mainemelis, 2010; Csikszentmihalyi, & Sawyer, 2014).

This process of navigating between the initial seed of an idea and the implementation of it is, as Catmull suggested, fraught with uncertainty and from the terrors of the blank page to the joys of discoveries, deeply emotional. Doyle (1998) reveals in her study of fiction writers, for instance, that beyond just having the initial ideas for writing, writers spoke of being affected and involved emotionally throughout the process of developing characters for their novels. Caves (2000) argues in his book on creative industries that creative work differs from humdrum work in that the creator "cares vitally" for the quality of their work and is thus presumably much more personally and emotionally invested in the process. That affect is consequential for creativity is well-established in existing research (e.g. Amabile et al., 2005), but we know little about how affect shapes idea navigation in particular.

I use the term *idea navigation* to describe the process through which groups specify initial ideas or insights over time. This process through groups develop, transform, and refine ideas can be seen as inherently generative as creative ideas emerge and existing ideas take on novel directions (Zhou & George, 2003; Mainemelis, 2010; Csikszentmihalyi & Sawyer, 2014; Perry-Smith & Mannucci, 2017; Rouse, 2018). Despite this process being recognized as being essential for creativity (Mumford & Gustafson, 1988; Finke et al., 1992; Nijstad & De Dreu, 2002), there is surprisingly little research on it (for notable exceptions see Kohn et al., 2011; Harvey, 2013; and McMahon et al., 2016). 

Scholars of creativity have referred to this process between idea generation and idea implementation as idea elaboration (Mainemelis, 2010; Csikszentmihalyi, & Sawyer, 2014) or idea development (McMahon et al., 2016; Rouse, 2018). However, idea elaboration is often used in existing literature as a static outcome measure of creativity (Torrance, 1982) and is thus not intended to help us understand the process of how groups navigate ideas over time.  

In addition, theoretical work on idea elaboration assume that one individual is primarily responsible for developing and pushing ideas forward, and are thus not intended to explain how groups with relatively flat hierarchies develop creative ideas. This is an important oversight because in today’s rapidly changing workplace, small and diverse groups are an increasingly common mode of generating creative solutions (Hargadon, & Bechky, 2006). Specific to collective creativity, there is increasingly evidence that groups excel and outperform individuals at developing ideas (Kohn et al., 2011; Harvey, 2013, McMahon et al., 2016), whereas they may fall behind individuals in number of ideas generated (Paulus & Nijstad, 2003) or novelty of ideas selected (Rietzschel et al., 2006). These findings indicate that examining the role of affect in how groups navigate ideas may be a productive avenue to further our understanding of collective creativity.

Lastly, existing conceptualizations of idea elaboration does not integrate emergent insights of the role that affect plays in how ideas develop. Theoretical work suggests that idea elaboration as a stage or phase in the creative process requires different kinds of social and contextual factors to be effective. For instance, Perry-Smith and Mannucci (2017) suggested that a key factor in creators’ ability to elaborate ideas is how successful they are in managing negative affect that arises from uncertainty about quality of ideas. Similarly, Mainemelis (2010) points out the importance of psychological safety in allowing individuals to pursue novel ideas. Creativity research has, however, traditionally been heavily cognitive (Sawyer & DeZutter, 2009), thus affect is primarily viewed as incidental to the creative process, typically improving creativity by facilitating individual cognitive processes thought to be at the heart of creativity (e.g. Isen et al., 1987; Fong, 2006). 

I use the term *idea navigation* to describe the process through which groups specify initial ideas or insights over time. First, it emphasizes the non-linear, recursive nature of the creative process reminiscent of finding one’s way through a winding maze (Lubart, 2001; Srinivasan, 2013), and second, it highlights the dual challenge groups face in this process: staying on course in order to arrive at a coherent product while simultaneously remaining open and flexible to replotting the course based on new insights (Zhou & George, 2003). This conceptualization of idea navigation is reflected in naturalistic accounts of creativity (e.g. Doyle, 1998) as well as interdisciplinary work on innovation showing that the process is often open-ended and requires on-going interpretation to surface the core concept (Buchanan, 1992; Lester & Piore, 2009; Stark, 2009).

This perspective emphasizes firstly that idea navigation is a dynamic, recursive process that occurs over time instead of a snapshot of creative outcomes. Secondly, while navigating ideas involves evaluation in that groups need to converge around some ideas they deem worthy of further pursuit, it is not a primarily cognitive process of validating ideas against task criteria (Amabile, 1996). Lastly, idea navigation foregrounds the role of affect in shaping how groups engage in the process of navigating ideas. 

- talk about Sarah's definition of convergent vs divergent creativity 
- "This section is a good start towards defining idea navigation, but I think it needs to go a little further to justify why prior work doesn’t capture all of the processes together"

There are several terms often used in research on affect and creativity, ranging from emotions, to moods, to dispositional traits, to meta-emotional abilities such as emotional intelligence. Affect can be thought of as an encompassing umbrella that covers both feeling states, which are short-term affective experiences, and feeling traits, which are more stable tendencies to feel and act in certain ways (Watson & Clark, 1984). Throughout this paper, I use the term affect to refer to such feelings, regardless of whether they are transient mood states or discrete moods resulting from specific events.

In this study I explore the role of affect in shaping how groups navigate ideas by conducting an inductive analysis of eight experimental circus groups.
